We're looking forward to this.
The inquiry with this is early days. Yeah.
We've had, uh, one briefing so far from officials.
Um, I've, I've personally visited almost every report
and talked with every port.
Um, but we will, we've, we've had some port visits, um,
so far, and we will do some more.
Uh, and we've got an extensive range of submitters
and we've been very, very gratified
by the interests that there is in this.
And, um, we hope that we can work our way through this
and end up with some recommendations which might help the
boat go faster, or in some cases even get into port
or out of port and get into the right port outta the right
port in an efficient way.
So, um, anyway, what we'll do is we, we look forward
to hearing from you and, um, uh, in your hands
and then look forward to some questions.
We've got 45 minutes
and then, um, we, we'll look forward
to making most of that. Alright. So, thank
You. Thank you,
thank you. And thank you for the opportunity.
Uh, we, we seriously welcome this inquiry,
particularly given the importance of shipping to, uh,
new Zealand's economic growth.
So my name is Joanna Murray
and I'm the executive officer
of the New Zealand Cargo Owners Council.
And here with me today is our chair,
Brent Falvey from ANCO Foods based in
and, uh, Cotty Jade Elston from, uh,
PPAC Forest Products based in Napier, both
of whom have traveled some distance today to be here.
Um, so just to recap quickly,
so the Cargo Owners Council is an organization
for large volume exporters and importers, uh, collectively.
Membership currently accounts for around 70%
of containerized exports
and a significant volume of import, uh, bulk exports,
imports, and domestic product.
So these are the guys with the skin in the game
and have, uh, considerable insight into what's working
and what isn't working across the shipping supply chain.
Um, although they come from diverse businesses, uh,
the common thread for our members is a focus on advocating
for re reliable, resilient,
and efficient freight supply chain in order to
minimize the cost of getting our exports into international
markets and to minimize the cost of landing our input
for New Zealand consumers.
Now we know that global shocks to the,
to the supply chain are just ongoing, whether it be weather,
uh, geopolitical tension, pandemics, those things are
outside our control and we know they will continue.
So our focus is to ensure that those things
that are within the control of NZ Inc are managed
to the absolute best level.
What, what we are looking for is peak performance across,
uh, supply chain infrastructure across the costs, across,
um, resilient ports.
What we are really looking for is
to run the smartest operation possible in our own supply
chain, so that we are in the best possible position
to mitigate big global supply chain shocks.
Now, you will have seen in our submission
that we've painted a picture of
how the New Zealand supply chain is
currently far from efficient.
Uh, it's been degraded by poor port productivity, by lack
of intermodal connectivity
and lack of coordinated infrastructure investment.
We did cover a lot
of ground in our submission at a fairly high level,
and we're happy to talk to any
of the aspects in our submission.
Um, and we would really welcome,
welcome your questions today, what Brett
and Jay are specifically going to talk about is, is how
that core productivity in the supply chain affects their
businesses, how it affects the New Zealand economy,
how it is actually gonna stymie government's
economic growth ambition unless something changes.
And we also, and we want to specifically focus in an area
where we think there's a role for government.
So, um, more than happy to take questions as we go through.
In fact, we'd really welcome questions to make sure
that we are talking to an area
that you know, you're interested in.
And if we are speaking in a language
that you don't particularly understand, please stop us
and get us to, uh, D Tech.
Um, and at the end, um, if we haven't covered an area
that was covered in our submission
and you'd like some detail on,
we're also really happy to talk to that. Okay.
Look, there'll be plenty of questions.
I think let's get, let's get what you want to say
as an initial intro first.
Yeah. Um, take, take the submission as read.
Um, but anything you wanted to highlight,
then there will plenty to questions.
Excellent. Okay. So I'll hand over
to Jay. Okay. At this point.
Thank you. Good morning. Uh, so I'll start
by recapping the port productivity.
That was in our submission,
but we have been able to update it
with the quarter 2 20 25 data
that we get from the MOT website.
The fig data, which is on the screen.
On that screen, yes. Mine down here.
Yeah, We've got screens all over. Oh, good.
Because you've got all Over the place.
Yep. So there's multiple ways
of measuring port productivity,
and this is just one of them, which is the crane rate.
So the, the crane rate is the number of containers
that are moved on and off the vessel
by one crane in one hour.
And as you can see in the graph,
where we currently are operating is at a level
that was similar to 2012, 2013.
So where we are currently operating is also 30% down from
the peaks that we can see
through early prior pre COVID as a
We do acknowledge that some
of those peaks may not necessarily be sustainable.
They did lead to some health and safety issues,
but we don't think the answer is to be running at 70%.
If we click to the next graph Please.
So the second graph shows the vessel exchanges.
So this is the number of containers that are moved on
and off the vessel within one port call.
So from 2012 you can see that on average
the vessel exchange has increased by 50%.
The reasons behind this increase in exchange is generally
bigger vessels or bigger ships that come in.
There is some freight consolidation behind it as well.
But the bigger picture that is not being seen is
that you would expect with bigger vessels, longer runs,
less stopping and starting
that there should be an increase in productivity.
And we are not seeing that.
We're not seeing that at all,
and it's actually substantially declining.
What this has resulted from,
or what this has resulted is
that in New Zealand we are falling
behind our global competitors.
So we're falling behind on pricing, falling
behind on efficiency.
And we are certainly falling behind on reliability.
Reliability. These are all very vital considerations
in a commodity market.
And I know there is so much good work happening in the
coalface and in the manufacturing offices
of out in wider New Zealand,
and it's coming to a crunch at this point.
I can use my own day job at Ppac as a ex example
of our economic impact.
So since 2018, we are now paying 30% more
to get our freight to Asia.
We are paying 50 to 60% more to get our freight to India.
And this government has a plan to move into India
and that should be a concern.
These increases in costs are directly related
to inefficiency in the sector.
We have seen very little improvement
or reasoning to substantiate the increase in these costs.
The impact at our business level is
that we are losing competitiveness if in fact we probably
have already lost competitiveness.
So we are competing with Europeans
and they have considerably reduced freight in comparison.
In our example in Ppac, we're a big Cox Bay company.
We are six to 7% of the local GDP.
We employ close to a thousand people directly
and through contracting we have some fantastic resources
and we are doing our utmost to build
and value add for New Zealand.
But We are getting it eaten away
by the inefficient supply chain.
We are not an isolated case. This is not just peck.
This has been replicated in many
companies throughout New Zealand.
You could talk, talk about.
Okay. Um, morning everybody.
Um, my, my day job as well as SCO Foods,
which is a meat producer.
We, um, coed office based in South island,
but we have plants, New Zealand wine.
Um, we've also been impacted by it.
Our our freight bill
before COVID, uh,
was in the 20 millions and now it's in the forties.
Um, that cost just gets pushed into the price of goods,
whether that's local or, or international.
So it lifts all the prices up.
Um, we, we can't sustain the cost within our margins, so
therefore it just goes into the cost of goods.
So you see the impact of that.
You know, you might see a leg of lamb in the supermarket is
now $80, but that's got freight costs inside there as well.
Which, which large. But, um, what I wanted want
to talk about as well was, um, in our submission, uh,
we argued about the emergence of the, uh,
um, hub and spoke model.
We think that's inevitable. That'll happen.
Um, I'm not sure everybody understands what the hub
and spoke model is, but, um,
a hub would be a big international DC port and,
and the spoke would be the smaller ports
featuring to those hubs.
Um, the feeders, the feeders would either be,
would be a number of things.
It would be, um, coastal shipping.
Uh, it would have to work very closely
to rail into road transport.
I think. Um, I think when we think about rail,
there's been some great work done
behind the scenes with rail.
Uh, in actual fact what we've seen is, um,
they've actually rebuilt their model
and I was lucky enough to see their facilities
and see the work that they've done.
But for them to be fully successful for New Zealand,
which is just for a benefit, which, which facility?
Uh, the one in Christchurch, ah,
that's the one we were hoping to
see like when we visited last week.
Really great. Um, electric trains.
Um, really, really good stuff, what they've done there.
And but for them to be truly successful, they need volume
and, and to get volume in the scale of economies, um,
once you'll get efficiencies
and then from efficiencies you also get
gonna see cost reductions.
Um, so the hub
and spoke model, working with that model with the,
with the rail would,
would be massive benefits for New Zealand.
Massive. Also gotta work with, um,
of course road transport guys.
And, and also, uh, there has to be an ability
for coastal shipping, uh, doing that.
Um, but in readiness for the, for the hub
and spoke model, um, it's critical that New Zealand
freight supply chain builds efficiencies
and we need an end to end multimodal, uh,
coordination across the entire, um, supply chain.
Um, we can't, the supply chain,
as you all know, is very complex.
Uh, it goes from the farm gate
or from the forest, um, to,
to our ports in containers or, or bulk.
Uh, but of course the imports is
reverse so it goes back there.
So it's enticed, um, supply chain,
not just just focusing on a port.
Um, but currently there's no end to end coordination
of the total supply chain whi which, which we really need.
Um, and the supply chains only as efficient
as the weakest link will allow.
Uh, and focusing on one part of the supply chain,
it neglects independence of the entire freight supply chain.
Um, what we must address urgently is that, um,
because of this lack
of coordinated investment in critical infrastructure,
we need to get a much more strategic view about our freight
flows from end to end.
Uh, we need an efficient right size connections
between ports, inland ports,
road rail, and coastal shipping.
So our submission,
there is no strategic lens over the freight supply
chain at all at the moment.
Sorry, Could you repeat that?
There's no, there is no strategic lens
over the freight supply chain.
So a strategy needs to be based on quality data
and it needs to be data driven.
We see this as an easy win for the government in this area.
The infrastructure needs to be right timed, right sized,
and the right requirements to meet the needs.
It should go without saying that we need to avoid premature,
unnecessary and duplicate spending.
Any suboptimal spend in this area will be carried by us
as cargo owners, but it will affect everyday New Zealanders,
whether it be the cost of rising goods
or whether it be the reduced profitability of the importers
and exporters that will in end in the end,
that will impact on the economy.
So New Zealand can only manage what is measured
and there is no quality data in this space at the moment.
Even the figs data, which is probably the best
that we've got, the ports have their own variations
of the calculations that they upload.
That's, That is MOT data. Yep.
There needs to be a, a much wider
and well-informed understanding of freight.
We need to know where it goes, how much of it goes,
where it moves, how it moves.
The government needs this data to be able
to make future plans in the transport area,
but also the supply chain operators need this data
and information so
that we can make informed investment decisions.
It's all about the right place at the right time, not only
for investment but for our freight.
So as Brent alluded, the supply chains are really complex.
So any decisions around supply chain need good knowledge
and they need the understanding of the connections
and the dependencies.
The best source of their information is the people that deal
with it day in, day out.
So that's us as cargo owners, that's transport operators,
that's the ports and the rail.
Uh, uh, as the council, we advocate
for a freight advisory steering committee.
We see government's role in this
as bringing together the people, the data
and the lived experience.
So manage the repository of that.
But we see as a minimum that we need to collect data on how
and where freight moves around the country.
Mm-hmm. The truck turnaround times
at ports and at key nodes.
We need to identify the key freight corridors,
be it on road, be it rail,
or be it the inland port connections.
We need to forecast future movements
and the potential impacts they may have on existing capacity
and the efficiency and all of that should help
to identify which parts
of the network are being constrained.
This will enable the right sized
investment at the right time.
So the council advocates for this data
to be at a national level so that the total cost
and economic benefit can be defined based on quality
New Zealand and New Zealand Inc.
Data rather than at a local isolated level.
There you go.
Um, in conclusion, we want to support the government
to set the clear strategy for freight.
We as cargo owners are the ones with the highest alignment
to the country's economic interests.
We need to be fully consulted and involved.
We offer our IP to assist the task of planning
for current and future freight.
Our vision for New Zealand Inc is to be supported
by an efficient, cost effective shipping supply chain
where it enables our businesses to trade competitively,
grow our export values, drive, drive job creations,
and provide economic resilience.
We want to see government recognize
that freight infrastructure
and the associated supply chain components are not merely
operational, that they underpin
economic security and resilience.
They need to, these need to be embedded in the transport
and maritime planning and deserve a rigorous strategic
approach led by quality data.
Thank you. That's a
really good, that's a really great start.
And can we have the, the we, we've got the, got there,
we've got the presentation, but the notes were useful
'cause there are some words
in there, which I think would very helpful.
Mm-hmm. Sure. Okay. That would be great.
I, we'll start with the questions, Carlos,
and then I'll put myself on.
Thank you for coming. Um, I just want
to look a little bit more information on this graph.
So the first thing I, there two questions.
The first one is, compared to the international, uh, uh,
global, global other port in, uh, in, in other country,
do you know what is the lift per hours for them?
Because you mentioned we are less efficient.
So how, what's the comparison?
It is difficult to measure that
because our ports are quite small compared
to the international ports.
So however, there is a global index
and it, I think it's referred to in our submission that we,
uh, the New Zealand ports are in the two forties out
of 300 odd ports.
Yeah. It's actually worse than, I
don't have the numbers. Yeah. It's
Actually worse than that. We're in the last
50 out of 400 ports ranked.
So in terms of, you know, the actual performance metric.
Alright. My, my second question is, um, by,
by looking at the graph, we can see
that things goes wrong at 2020 in quarter two
for Auckland and Targa port in 2022 quarter four
for Targa and Napier.
Do you know what's happened with that?
Sharp reduce in efficiency?
Uh, the can to bring up,
There's a sharp decrease in in those.
So that's COVID and also that,
Yeah, so 20 20 20 was COVID 2020
Is COVID. Yeah. But
what happened to 2022?
So we just didn't recover, we just didn't,
whereas the rest of the world gradually built back up.
That's one of the observations that we've made.
New Zealand has just not really picked up post COVID.
So it's not like there's some technical issues
or some policy changes or health and safety rules changes.
It's not due or this is it.
There's, I'd have to double check the timing.
There is automation. So they did stop their
automation in Auckland.
So that didn't go to plan for them.
So that did have an impact.
But in general terms, we just have not picked up
back with the rest of the world.
Okay. As Measured by container.
As measured by, Oh, uh, crane rate or, yeah,
But it's the same for our bulk members.
It's the same across all cargo owners. Mm-hmm.
I think one of the points
that we brought out in our submission was
that if things go bad at Auckland,
IE if there are delays in Auckland,
it is a ripple effect right
through the rest of the supply chain.
So hotel will be affected by slow moves in
or delays in at port of Auckland.
Yes. And that's a, that's actually a regular theme.
I, I put myself on lot of Dan then
Because this is why I try to emphasize Karen,
because in when you say that is due to the ripple effect
of Auckland, but Auckland doesn't have anything changes in,
in the sector of, you know, quarter fourth 2022, only Tower
and Napier, they got a sharp drop and efficiency.
So this is why I'm trying to ask what causing this sharp,
um, job and and efficiency for those two ports.
I think it is part of the wider issue.
There's not good data because I've a look
At Ran some of your
Like a valid point. You,
Let's try not to jump in.
Um, okay. Done Carlos.
Oh. So we just don't, don't know the reason why.
Not specific, not specifically it as part
of the general trends reason. Alright, thank you.
So are, so let's, let's ask that question.
Um, 'cause the Auckland bidders, we know that,
I think it's about 50% of,
of ships actually do things on time in New Zealand.
Some of that's international, some
of that's that's in New Zealand.
Um, but in terms of those, those efficiency reductions,
those are quite stark.
And you've got no idea, I mean, you've had conversations
with ports, no idea what's causing it.
One of the, one of the things would seem to be that they,
they're having difficulty actually having enough space
to manage the containers
and then they go like, we've got the containers,
which we wanna get out now the bottom of the stack of three
or four of them and just the time to move those things
around is inordinately inefficient.
Their ability to get space I think is challenged as well.
But, um, you know, it was nothing at
All. Space, space, space is
an issue. Of course it is. Yeah.
I like Littleton trying to fix that now. Mm-hmm.
Um, also what was happening too is that, um,
with the ships coming, they'd arrive at Auckland, well,
whatever port generally Auckland first
port because of the imports.
Uh, and they'd arrive off windows because of various delays.
And so I dunno if you understand what a window is,
but all the short port ships are guaranteed a certain time
on a ber on a particular day at a particular tire.
Yeah. So if they come in late,
then they simply have to go in a queue.
Mm-hmm. And then there can be, um, a number
of ships sitting in the queue
and then they slowly go through, um,
Sorry. Oh no, I'll, no,
no, no. I
Was just gonna ask. I'll, I'll, I'll
get my lit, my my order here.
Sorry about that. Um, and so,
so they simply can't get through.
And then if the port's all fully congested,
it just keeps moving itself around the country.
Um, and,
and what also happens is that some of the ports,
if like our large, our largest import port, um,
have eight cranes, but really,
really do see more than four working.
Often you drive down the port
and there's a ship on ber with one crane working.
Um, so you just see the efficiencies,
just, I don't know.
Well, we've been told by the CEO that, um,
his focus is health and safety, not productivity.
Um, I suspect that they haven't got Craig Manning or,
or even enough equipment to do that,
but I'd need to have a conversation with him.
Um, and if you think about the cost to that, ships can be
to charter a ship for a day
can be a hundred thousand dollars.
If it sits off a port for a week and we've got nine ports
and we've got numerous ships sitting around the coast,
the numbers become hundreds of millions very quickly,
which gets passed down to us, gets passed down to, to Kiwis.
We will be, we will obviously be talking to, um, to
All Dan.
Thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, yeah,
really interesting presentation and thanks for the data.
I think that's really useful.
Um, just to drill down to the port level,
'cause I think there's, clearly there's something going
on across all of our port.
So the productivity is across the country.
Um, we've talked, we've talked about space, um,
we've talked about, um, data, lack data.
Um, what can you tell me about skills
and kind of the investment in the infrastructure?
Like what are other ports doing across the world in terms
of technology, infrastructure, investment,
and then also on the skills front, I mean, um, you know, is
what what would you say is the biggest driver of
that poor productivity at the poor level?
I, I would say it's, it's probably comes down to many
and number of skill workers that they've got.
Automation is a big thing for the future.
If you look at Singapore,
they're just on a different planet compared to us.
Um, there has to be automation to some degree.
Um, unfortunately the automation
that Auckland did didn't work for them.
I, I, I believe they use the wrong type.
But there's automation all over the
world that's very successful.
I was at LPC just a few weeks ago.
They were showing me their new plans, what they wanna do.
They're gonna do automated stackers,
which mean they can bring it off the ship,
stack them up fire efficiently about people getting involved
from health and safety point of view.
And then they can reorganize that
and put them back on the ships more efficiently.
Automation's gonna play a big key going forward.
And are you sensing when you interact with some
of our ports that they're, they're actively looking at this?
Or are they sort of in They would love
to do it. We just don't have money.
I know Littleton and Tara are actively looking at it.
Yeah. Um, I haven't spoken to NAP about automation.
Their biggest problem at the moment. They're pretty
Keen too, I think. Beg
your pardon? I think they're pretty Keen
too. Yeah. Are they?
Yeah.
Nap PPI's biggest problem is weather.
And so they've been really knocked around
by weather over the last year or so.
Um, so what they're trying to do now is they've just, uh,
invested, I think with Dunedin, uh, with the dredge.
And so they're gonna try to make the channel deeper
so when the ships come in, if there's a big swell,
they'll still be able to get in.
So they're trying to figure out ways that they can improve.
But they, they set a lot of ships set
outside the last 12 months from Nate, but just due to swell.
Yes. And then on the manning front, I mean, uh,
where are our massive, where are the biggest skill shortages
in the sector?
I would say Auckland's got, without being the CEO there,
I'd say Auckland's quite obvious
that they haven't got enough manning just
'cause, you know, you see one ship, one crane working,
the question is why, you know, when they've got eight,
you know, if they had four cranes working,
gonna ship it would get out 75% faster.
Yes. And so, you know, as I say, that impacts all
around the coast, but I'd suggest
they've all got landing issues.
Okay. And then finally, um, just
as Freight Advisory Council mean, what's your view
of government's role in setting that up?
Are you thinking that the government needs to kind
of set this in statute so that it's a formal body?
Or is it, or is it industry led?
I mean, what's your sense of how, what's,
what do you want from government in terms of how
to set the structure up for the, uh, the, you know,
the coordination of the data and the what's
Yeah, I think we might be a bit agnostic in terms of that.
And the, the sense that we have though is that there needs
to be, right now there is nothing Right now, there's just a,
a vacuum in terms of bringing together, um, this lens,
a freight lens, um, across all the myriad, if you like,
um, sorry, maritime functions in a way.
And we feel that the voice of
those at the coalface, the cargo owners, the
transport operators, uh,
and the ports, there needs to be a forum of some form us.
And we've caught it, a steering committee
or advisory committee to enable that kind of the,
the strategy that kind of, um, discussion
and strategy to evolve.
Um, our thinking was it needs to be government led,
but we hadn't necessarily thought it would be a legislative
entity, but government led to give it the, um, momentum
and funding essentially.
I mean, our owners all have day jobs.
Our members all have day jobs.
Um, it's, it's, it's a resource issue really. Mm, thank
You. Okay. Uh,
It's, Could I just come back to your question?
I've actually worked out, it's the format of a graph.
It's quarter 1 20 23.
It's just the way that Excel's showing the
lines. And it's Cyclone Gabriel,
Right?
Oh, that's, yeah. Okay.
Right. Fair enough, fair enough.
That makes sense enough, Simon.
Oh, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, look, um, your, your submission is very helpful
that it outlines some significant problems
with productivity, but you also make the point that
ports have increased the number of the charges, uh,
at power 30 of your submission vehicle booking system
charges at Auckland have increased 2000%,
uh, in the last four years.
There seems to be some kind of cash grab, uh,
by Auckland Council through the Board of Auckland.
Um, but there's been no commensurate, uh,
increase in productivity.
So, um, what do you think the committee should be
thinking about, uh, when, when we hear about that problem?
Look, we have raised previously our
thoughts around port ownership that we think sits
behind some of this.
Ultimately, uh, it comes back to a point that we have made,
um, right up front that we believe ports are need
to be viewed as economic strategic assets as opposed
to source and revenue with their owners.
And there is a relationship between, um,
charging regimes and dividends paid back
to local government.
However, uh, yeah, that's not an area that we,
we, there isn't a clear path
for government intervention there.
So in terms of, uh, economic regulation, is there any, uh,
is there an economic regulator that covers
what ports can charge and can? Uh,
There isn't.
I mean, we have looked to potentially a commerce commission,
uh, taking a close look at VBS charges
and that might be something that our colleagues behind us.
Right. Well, rose, certainly, I mean, the dark reality is
that any of these charges will find their way back
to cargo owners ultimately.
And, um, VBS is one of the obvious ones that
that system simply prices have gone up and up and up
and there is, you know, productivity hasn't.
So,
Hmm. What are we paying
for? So, just so supplementary on
that, this chair, if it's okay.
So just thinking about, um, the fact
that these businesses are essentially
monopolies in their location.
Uh, you know, people talk about moving the Port of Auckland,
but hey, at the moment there's just one port.
Um, do, do you think that it would make sense to link fees
and charges and revenues back
to investment and productivity?
'cause at the moment it just looks like,
it just looks like a big vacuum cleaner being applied to
the, uh, freight industry, freight sector.
Um, but there didn't seem to be a corresponding level
of investment in port or,
or, you know, access to port productivity.
Well, certainly we would like
to see more accountability for productivity.
One of the things that we have been discussing as part
of our kind of a overall strategy is
monthly KPIs at a port level publish on port productivity
and how that relates to their fee charging.
Okay. You know, what are we getting?
What are the bang for bucks that we're getting?
And that's, that sort of goes back to good quality data
and none of that exists at the moment.
Okay. That's a really good point, Mr. Chair.
And just one further, one last, last one. Yeah.
Just on the governance
and ownership of ports, you did reflect that, um, many
of these ports are in local government ownership.
Uh, do you think that ports have sufficient access
to capital to deploy for the type of automation
or productivity investments, uh, that they might want
to make in an ideal world?
You know, 'cause I, I assume, I mean, I've met a lot
of the port operators and management like, uh,
the chair has, and they all seem to be, uh,
generally very competent, capable people.
Um, do you,
do you think it would be helpful if maybe they weren't in
local government ownership?
I was gonna say there's probably two answers to that,
because there is towering report that obviously is
desperately in need of investing Yes.
And has been for several years now. Mm-hmm.
So that is not necessarily a investment
a, a limit to their investment.
There is other reasons that are causing problems there.
Yeah. However, there are other ports without the,
through the rest of the country that yes, their,
their ability to access funding is limited. Mm-hmm.
Littleton is currently country, which is a good example.
Now they're asked, they've done a bit quite a large study,
they need 800 million to get to where they need to be.
Uh, which I don't know how much the councils can, can offer,
but it seems like a big chunk to me
and how they're gonna fund that.
I don't know. But the investment needs to be made. They,
They have, They have given us advice when we,
we visited them, but yes,
it does involve the council having a, playing a part.
So, yeah. Yes.
But I guess, um, the issue, I mean, they said to us
that they had 600 million worth of assets
and they need another 800 million to invest,
but people are gonna have to pay for that.
And I think it comes back to the point
that you've been making, which is they're high cost now,
but if we make the capital investments
to increase efficiency, we also still have to pay for those.
That, that's correct. And so, yeah.
It's, but I,
I think the point about data is really well taken.
Um, yes. And, and I guess
because of the relationship between the port
and the landside infrastructure that's needed
to get things in and out of the port
Gonna Run, inevitably, government has to be involved
and making these decisions, whether it's local or central.
Yes. Because, can you get the question, Julian?
There's a limit to what you can do. Yeah.
Well, I mean, you guys have asked lots of questions.
Yeah, no, no. But, well, I guess what I wanted to ask is,
I mean, it, it seems like you, we probably need,
would it be fair to say that we need some
strategic coordinated central government view on freight?
But excuse me, go. Certainly would we, we,
we put reluctant to use the word strategy simply
because, you know, two years ago
more there was a freight strategy, which went nowhere.
There's been a number of attempts to get good data to do a,
a sector strategy, and they don't go
Anywhere. It's not happening. Yeah.
The freight demand study was meant
to be refreshed, but last time was 2018. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Yeah.
And there was a supply chain strategy, ministry
of transport, which was, so it has not gone any further.
Um, do you think it maybe there needs
to be a joint venture between people like yourselves
and, and government
and imports to, to all work together
to get the information they need?
At least for data? Yeah,
We, about the structure,
but I think being able
to contribute is the main thing. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, and just to ask your question about, you know,
the costs, um, course costs will go up,
but, you know, if ships aren't waiting for one or two
or three weeks off a port, there's hundreds of millions
of dollars that will flow backwards into the economy.
Um, last one. Yeah.
Um, I was just at ports of Auckland last week
and they mentioned, uh, some changes, pretty minor changes,
but that would enable them to, um, they said,
I'm sort of answering your question,
but they said that they couldn't, they had
to move the ships back and forth on the wharf birth
because it wasn't long enough.
And that was one of the limits
to using multiple cranes, I think.
And so they're gonna extend some
births. Yes. But do you think that's,
But cranes can be moved on rails.
Cranes be moved on wheels,
you know, they can, they can move.
Yeah. Um, how they set up as, I don't particularly know.
I mean, that's business decision, how they,
how they set up their ports
from an operational point of view.
Mm-hmm. But if, if this, this hub
and spoke, which is, which we believe is coming,
that'll only lead to bigger ships.
Yeah. Yeah. No, I think Auckland is,
they're extending out some
births and they think that will help. Yes.
Most of 'em are trying to in one place.
Or another question is, can they walk
Or Should they Yeah.
Or should they, Should they all thank Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Uh, your submission talks about a,
a five year window to get the supply chain issues,
um, un underway.
I just pick up on the comment you'd made about, um,
the trading opportunities with India mm-hmm.
Um, as a emerging, uh, priority there. Yep.
So what, what do you see as sort
of the immediate practical steps that could be taken
to give effect to what you've referred to around, um,
trading opportunities, uh,
particularly within year and other emerging markets?
I dunno that, I dunno, there is an immediate result
that you will see because all this stuff, I mean,
that is the five years, all this stuff is gonna take time.
Infrastructure will take time.
Deciding on collecting the data in the first
place will take time.
Uh, so the five years was based around that, uh,
the, the ship order files.
So the ships are, the new ships are getting bigger
and that will take time to flow through.
So in relation to India,
I don't have a a, a silver bullet to fix that,
but I would just say that it, it is an issue
that we have tried to raise several times
and as we've progressed through the, the discussions
with India, that getting freight from New Zealand
to there is very, very difficult.
Mm-hmm. So I think that would need more support from, uh,
as cargo owners, it would need involvement from shipping
lines, ports as well.
And I'd say the government needs
to be involved if they're really
serious about hitting there.
So quite a coordinated response then what you,
If, if we thought about a quick win
that could make a difference, is, um, Tara getting
that, getting
Use.
I'm Trying, I'm trying to say a
supplement on that one. Can you, can
You describe, don't
supplement ship
The end because everybody chipped
in what they thought the end was.
What was, oh, I'm sorry. Oh,
Tara has been waiting for what now? Six years.
Six years? I believe I've spent something $12 million.
Yeah. Um, I was talking to 'em just a week or so ago.
They, if, if next hearings go through,
they believe it's four or five years
before they even can do something before it's finished.
Um, I mean that's how much money have we lost?
Enormous. What I'm gonna do rather than subs,
I'm gonna just take Tracy next
and we'll keep on, keep on going around 'cause
otherwise be subs off everything. Okay.
I'll be very, very quick because you
have answered both of my questions already.
Um, you've talked a lot about, um, investment in terms of,
um, and, and pointing to specific ports.
But I would imagine underlying that as a strategy, I hate
to use the word strategy because, um, because the hub
and spoke mo model is not gonna afford everybody
to be in the same position, are they?
Sure. Mm-hmm. That's correct. Um, we've gone
through the ship shipping lines versus the
exporters, the competition.
Um, we've, we've cycled
through those phases is what you're saying.
Now it's time to
actually have a much more coordinated approach.
'cause we can't invest everywhere. No,
That's right. That's correct.
And, and,
and if we expect the international vessels
to visit everywhere, it just slows things down
and further down and it becomes
uneconomic for them to visit.
And we painted that picture, I think on the first page
of our submission, what that could look like.
Our worst fear would be that they just, uh,
make fewer port calls and Yeah.
So some, some investment decisions could be artificially
being held back through, back
of a clear vision about who's gonna need it most.
Yes. Yeah, that's right. That's right.
So can you hold five And Jody,
the shipping lines are in agreement
with the hub and spoke as well.
Yeah.
Can I just ask a couple questions quickly?
And then I got Dan and then Carlos.
Um, just in terms of if we go up
and spoke, essentially the monopoly issue that you raised
before becomes even more accentuated.
We, we likely end up presumably with Auckland,
maybe North Port, depending on what, how
that, that works out.
Mm-hmm. Um, Targa Littleton. Yes.
Yes. Um, So, so that becomes, that, that,
that becomes even more accentuated in terms
of monopoly behavior potentially.
Well, I don't really think it's a monopoly.
I I think what we're currently seeing is like, um, northport
road transport cargo down to Targa.
Yeah. So, yeah, no, my point is that if we go hub
and spoke, we are gonna end up with more and more, um, more
and more product going out
of a more limited number of ports.
Yes. Those ports become monopolies and therefore
Not if the, not, if there's the rest
of the transport modes are working efficiently.
So if you've got a strong coastal shipping network,
for example, exports are going into regional ports Mm.
And making their way up to a hub port on a coastal vessel.
Yes. No, I understand exactly what you're saying there.
That just means that the, the end ones become more important
just in terms of the way the shipping lines work.
And we've had, we've had this, this issue
of whether it's the shipping lines, the ports
or the cargo owners, particularly the big cargo owners.
I think they're particularly fonterra.
Um, or, or kata, the big car
who actually calls the shots about where product goes out of
who's, who's really the, the one that's got the leverage.
We've heard Qs about a third, about number three masks,
number three customer, um, in the world.
Uh, so it's not small.
So, so the question is who's got the leverage
to make those calls?
And particularly in relation to that coastal shipping side
of things, one of the issues sitting there is that the, the,
a lot of those currently,
those international lines are calling it a whole series
of ports that's not necessarily very efficient for them,
but they're obviously seeing it as more efficient than doing
it by coastal shipping at the moment for some reason.
And of course that undermines the coastal shipping.
So I'd just be interested in your thoughts on that,
that collection of,
Um, first of all, um, ship's gonna be bigger.
So a lot of the regional ports, they simply won't fit up.
Yes, agreed. You know, a a a 12,000 con, um,
container ship would be something the vicinity
of 300 meters long and quite deep.
So there's, as time goes by,
they won't get into these little ports.
And, and um, when we, we met with the ports in March,
they said they're not bothered if it goes on a
feeder ship or an international ship.
They just want the container
across the wharf to drive revenue.
Okay. Yeah.
Um, just a continuation of that on the hub and spoke model.
So are, are we clear, I mean it sounds like it,
we're really talking about Auckland in terms of the hub,
Auckland, Targa and Littleton. Is that
Littleton And potentially Dunedin
and potentially, I, I, I think industry will actually decide
that yes, what's the most efficient ports to go to,
um, and how that works.
Um, we haven't got a fixed view on what those ports are yet.
Uh, but it needs to be big deep sea ports
where big ships can come into.
How do we rapidly move towards that model given
that it's probably the most efficient, um, you know,
productive enhancing structure that we could
Step one is the data so we actually know
where the freight's moving to and from, and then
after that, uh, then industry will decide. Yeah, I
Think, um, some coordination, which comes back
to this idea of a steering committee actually
getting people around the table
To some extent. We're already
on that path. Yeah. We, yeah.
It's, it's happening already. Yes. Yep. Yep.
Thank you. Carlos Is just, now I just want
to mention on the poll of Ty,
can you give us a little bit more detail,
because it looked like you, your, your public release on,
on July 25th.
It's a perfect example to try to
identify the problem you guys are facing and,
and, and the port industry.
Can you just give me a little bit more detail
As in the delays with the Yes.
Why there a delay? What, what you see causing,
causing you guys like, you know, um,
the, the course as well.
Like, can, can you just talk about above?
I think it's pretty well understood, sort of the delays,
uh, have dragged on
and they have cost a lot,
which is just not being recognized.
Uh, how does tar get their money back
because they're still gonna have
to spend money in some point
to actually build the wolves that they want to build.
So they, yeah, I'm not, not a hundred percent sure what you
Question, because I can see that from your release.
You actually mentioned there's a problem
with the government vision as well.
There is the way of the consent process,
and this is the multiple things you've been mentioned.
So I just want you to, to talk to the committee, uh,
the committee, what is the real issues
because not everyone read that.
Uh, I think the public notice,
A lot of the, um, a lot of the problem is congestion
and if the ships can't get into Auckland
because other ships wake, they'll simply go to Targa
and they'll just charge you cargoes there.
Then they'll try and rail all the Auckland cargo back up
so it causes more congestion.
The ports become fr then more ships sit off the side
and it's just an never ending circle.
And and you reckon there's six years to get a consent.
That's what's taken so far. That's what
It's taken so far. Yeah. So far. So,
Yeah. And, and it, it looks
like it could be much more. Mm-hmm.
And that's what frustrating you, isn't it?
Well, it's like, it, there's congestion there now,
so that slows everything down.
It affects productivity. Mm-hmm.
So it's, it's the wasted opportunity to Yes.
And what I think the release that you're talking about,
we just noted that the government has an ambition
for export growth and we're saying we can't handle
that current supply chain is not handling
the volumes at the moment.
What's it gonna look and how are we going to meet that
ambition if we do not have a more efficient
freight supply chain? They
Literally have to turn ships away.
Yeah. So no, that, that's
what I say is a, is a perfect example.
See what, what we should be addressing Yeah.
For, for the future development and in this country as well.
So, I mean, you mentioned fast track, um, process
and the release as well, like mm-hmm.
How they can help you guys to, um,
you reckon fast track approach will help us
to develop our port much faster
and helping to release some of the calls, um, for,
for you guys as well, isn't it? Absolutely.
We, we firm believe that ports are strategic assets
and should be viewed through that lens as a need to,
you know, economic, economically essential.
Sure. Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, we've probably got heaps more questions,
but we have run time, um, which proves the point that, um,
10 minutes is never gonna be enough for anybody
and to get any value whatsoever.
So now we really appreciate that.
We may well want to have some more conversations,
sometimes be able to reach out to you
and ask you some more questions as we go
through, but it's been very, very helpful.
You're very welcome to stay
and listen to the, the next part, um, and, uh,
and, and keep in touch.
So we'll do a quick switch around.
Thank you. Thank you.
Script charges.
Do you borrow Okay. Okay.
Right Statement on
Our report because I think it's a fantastic,
I they kind of what we Facing, what's the challenges?
I mean, obviously it's a huge, I think probably
Thinking about what we want, so
Maybe what we'll do at Debrief going, what,
what do we want from,
Because we we're five minutes over at the moment.
So Solo Billy. Okay. Don Billy, welcome.
Good to have you here. And,
Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair.
I hope, I hope you enjoyed that last session.
Right. Okay. Well,
and thank you also for, um, for coming in.
You know, I know, um, we were keen to Yes, thank you.
Get somebody into, you know, to hear from, uh,
this, this, um, session.
So great to have you here. So we're in your hands.
We take, take your submission that we've got, um,
and it's read, but, um, you know, whatever you want to,
to start with and then we'll get into some questions.
Okay. Uh, good morning, Mr. Chair and colleagues.
Um, and, and in fact, I think it's great
that we follow the New Zealand Cargo Owners is, uh,
ultimately the customer for many of our members.
And, um, ultimately we are the ones that get these goods
to the ports or to and from the ports.
So, um, first off I'll just say, uh, transfer.
New Zealand's highly supportive of the inquiry
and we welcome this opportunity to speak.
Uh, we're going to sort of tag team this, so I'll do some
and then I'll hand over to, um, Billy Clemons,
who's our head of policy and advocacy.
Just a little bit about transforming New Zealand.
We represent 1100 members,
including approximately 800 road freight companies.
Well, that's about one fifth of the road freight businesses.
Um, we're very proud of our broad membership
and, uh, many of our members too, uh,
operate multimodal businesses.
The importance and the significance of the ports
and maritime sector is demonstrated by us hosting
and facilitating, uh, at a specific industry group.
And in this case that's the port
and intermodal sector group.
And through that we get direct membership, uh,
input into our advocacy and our views.
I'd also like to point out that, um,
our submission has some very common themes with the
NZ Council of Cargo Owner submission
and also the New Zealand, uh,
infrastructure New Zealand submission.
To summarize our position, we are generally supportive
of the terms of reference, uh, particularly
those sections on the economic contribution
and efficiency, uh, infrastructure
and investment needs, regulation, government governance
and ownership, and workforce and skills development.
What I'd tell about a couple of the other areas is that
we believe environmental sustainability
and safety practice, uh, those sections, they're actually,
uh, there's been a lot of work
and they're reasonably well examined by the likes
of the Climate Commission, uh, in Maritime New Zealand.
And in the latter case, particularly that Port Port Health
and Safety Leadership Group.
And with that in mind
and us being very mindful of the effort
and cost required to take
or to undertake these types of inquiries,
then we think those areas could perhaps,
they could perhaps be less emphasis on them.
Okay. Look, I'm just gonna speak to a couple
of those first, uh, areas that the terms of reference covers
and, and just highlight I suppose the areas we see as most,
uh, high priority in terms of the first
leg, which is the economic contribution and efficiency.
Um, we are highly supportive of looking into that
and I, I think, you know, again, we just follow, uh,
some great discussion on the cost to the country and,
and ultimately it's, uh, just a cost of living
due to all the delays we are seeing at the ports.
Right. Um, a and also a, as I said, it is a common theme,
but we, we, we do struggle with a lack
of quality data in this area,
and we think it's absolutely key.
We start collecting good data so there can be, uh, good
decision making on investment.
Uh, in fact, with, uh, the Ministry
of Transports freight demand study, I actually just met
with them earlier this week
and, uh, certainly they claim perhaps their earlier position
was misunderstood
and, uh, certainly considering, um,
doing something in that area.
And we've offered to help, um, scope some of the terms
of reference for the next study, whenever that should be.
Um, as was discussed earlier too,
the ministry transport do have, uh, the figs system,
that's the freight information gathering system.
Um, and, and that does summarize, uh, containers entering
and leaving the nine ports.
Um, but for us, uh, the data in
that set currently is much stronger in rail and ports
and in fact, that's very poor in road.
Um, but we encourage a robust
and critical assessment of the contributions the ports make
to economic development.
Uh, what we would like to see out of this inquiry,
and, uh, through previous roles I've had,
I've seen a few government inquiries
that the recommendations are quite explicit
on actually delivering, uh, performance improvements
as opposed to just giving a picture
of what's currently happening.
Okay. Um, we'd also, uh,
welcome a thorough investigation into competition
between the courts, uh,
and as was chatted to some, uh, to some,
to quite some substance earlier with New Zealand Council
of Cargo Owners, the port fees.
Right. Um,
I'll just move on to the, uh,
make a few comments on the second leg
of the terms of reference.
Again, the key parts for us are evaluating the adequacy
of infrastructure and then
identifying investment priorities.
And then in terms of reviewing the interface between ports
and the rest of the transport system,
I just can't stress strongly enough the importance that, uh,
a multimodal look
and end-to-end look is taken with that inquiry.
Uh, we are highly supportive of element two,
which is reviewing the interface,
and as I say, it's got to include, uh,
whatever modes are needed to provide the most efficient
and most productive supply chain.
Uh, we do caution against following the example
of the Ministry of Transport's national freight
and supply chain strategy that costs about three quarters
of a million dollars, um, in our view that really lacked
any clear, um,
recommendations on delivering performance improvements.
And as I mentioned at the start, um,
just looking into the safety practices both into ports
and on sea, and again, bearing in mind, um, particularly
with Inter Islander travel, um, our,
our members are traveling on those vessels.
You know, there's no one that cares more about what happens
to those people and what risks they put at.
Um, but we do say, given
the vast amount of work that's been done in recent years,
uh, in terms of safety, um,
and that's with work site, work with WorkSafe, now
with maritime of, uh, inance taking over WorkSafe, um,
duties at ports, uh, our recommendation would be
that perhaps those areas could be given
less priority. Sorry, Don,
I could just pitch in the, just the, the item
of examining the role of Maritime New Zealand
and regulating the sector.
I mean, it just seems like since they took over primary
regulatory responsibility in 24, we just wonder if maybe a,
a little preemptive, I'm sure you've been in conversations
with, um, maritime New Zealand, for example,
but so that our, our experiences with that important health,
health and safety, uh, leadership group that they've got,
um, they seem to be tracking well
and they're sort of introducing themselves to our members,
I think as the primary regulator now,
sod just be a little reluctant to maybe, um,
dive too deeply into that some point inquiry.
Probably the main issue which we had in mind there was
the, um, the issue around, um, I'd say tugs,
but, uh, you know, boats that are vessels that are capable
of looking after ships, which are
particularly in this part of the world.
Um, carry on.
And I think, actually, Billy, that's a great segue and,
and I'll hand over to Billy to talk about the last four
Elements.
Oh, great. I think we're probably really interested in
not whether you think we should do them or not do them,
but on, on your advice of your experience of
how the system's working or not working. Yep.
Um, so if, if, if I may just to talk about, um,
Simon Court raised about those issues around VBS fees,
that's certainly a, a leading issue for our members
and Port Terrace more generally, I think, yeah,
there's been an explosion in those fees.
There's a, there's this regular trend that we see
of how they get introduced.
So at the moment it's, it's Auckland to Onga, uh, Napier
and I think Littleton who have some kind
of vehicle access charges,
and that enabled by software bookings that allow you
to book a slot essentially, so
that they're introduced on the basis that they'll be,
that they're a productivity measure
and that they've, they can increase truck turnaround times
and reduce queuing.
There certainly can be an initial productivity gain,
but yeah, the AF after they're introduced,
and you'll see in Port of Auckland, they're,
they're an excellent revenue tool,
particularly from the local government, uh, owners, uh, who,
who are very open about the fact that they expect, uh,
greater revenue from those courts.
We think that, um, in terms of what, what we'd like to see,
um, if, if the committee was able to look into, uh,
some increased regulatory responses there.
So at the lower end, uh, there's currently amendments, um,
uh, proposed to the Commerce Act that would allow industry
to develop sort of voluntary codes to regulate these sort
of port side charges.
And that's the Australian model where you have, um,
you know, mandated consultation windows, uh, and,
and ports need to be very transparent around
that price setting and, um, change, uh,
give certain amounts of notice, for instance.
That would be very helpful. Also, we could look at moving
to more of an sort of airport style regulation,
which is a slightly higher level where, um, uh,
the Commerce Commission doesn't set airport fees,
but it does require a greater level of transparency, uh,
and also, um, mandates, um,
a higher standard of consultation.
We think that's why this, um, you, you, they, you tend
to see higher public profile of, um,
those airport fee changes
and stronger pushback from, from airlines and other users.
So that would, that would certainly be helpful. Yeah.
Um, just as two particular tools,
and we have certainly spoke with, um, spoke
with Minister Simpson about that, uh, recently,
and, uh, we understand that those changes to the concept,
uh, uh, are entrained,
but we'd certainly like those to be prioritized,
and that'd be, that'd be a very helpful outcome.
Also think it's probably worth pointing out as well,
that the risk is that
as local councils end up being more pressured for revenue,
the temptation is to push for that.
And for example, if there were considerations around,
for example, capping rates, for instance,
there might be some unintended, um, consequences if,
if there weren't other regulatory, uh, steps put in place
around, uh, how councils might look to make up that revenue.
So it's just, so we'd like
to be looked into just as example,
Um, If we can.
Oh, um, just to move to workforce
and skills development, we think that in terms of
what would be really helpful with the disestablishment
of the workforce development councils, we've kind
of lost some, and certainly very valid reasons around
how much they were costing
and whether they were delivering for industry.
But they did provide some force power about producing
reports and identifying gaps in the workforce.
So certainly transport news, we are trying to play our part.
We've, um, commissioned a, um,
data study over the last three censuses looking at our
changing workforce, the gaps in there,
and what recommendations we see that, um, uh, worked
with the Australian Rail Association to highlight sort
of gaps in the industry, but we're sure that instead aor
and other sectors as well.
It would be great if, um,
the inquiry could look into gaps there
and potentially whether immigration settings
and domestic workforce development, um,
is currently providing the future
workforce that we currently need.
Mm-hmm. That's useful too. Thank you.
Yep. Okay. Questions? I have time.
And then Tracy. Oh, thank you Mr. Chief.
Um, so just coming back to the, uh,
vehicle access charges, uh, what are the kind
of productivity improvements that were initially gained, um,
with, with, with the booking system?
Yeah. Um, so if, I think if you talk to talk to Port
of Port of Napier, they were, I'm,
I'm afraid I can't give a figure, but would described as
as substantial in terms of, um, the, the number of vehicles
that they see queuing
to get into the port was substantially reduced.
And they're looking at moving to stage two of that process.
But for example, once, once they're introduced, you saw Port
of Auckland, um, you know, really ratchet up those fees, um,
claiming that first of all they wanted the revenue,
but secondly they wanted to move truck travel off peak and,
and that that just hasn't shifted.
That's one of the metrics that they're just failing to meet,
is moving those truck journeys, um, yet try trying
to get trucks to operate, um, out of ours in, in the dark
or, um, and, you know, a member of ours did a sort of,
a large North Island member did a survey
and found I think about 22% of their customers were,
were capable of, um,
processing container deliveries off peak at all.
And so I think the concern is that, um, cer certainly, um,
time of use charging, uh, yeah, you could,
you can make a good case for that.
I just think that what our members see is the reality is
it's very difficult to translate that, um, into,
into actually shifting freight customer demands. Yeah.
So just follow follow up. Sorry.
Sorry. What, what I'd add to that too is, um,
with shifting the access into ports to other hours, right?
That that's only one part
of the supply chain that's being adjusted.
You know, there are other consequential impacts, so whether
that's, um, moving the driver force to work time
and that comes at a cost.
'cause generally there are sort of higher rates paid for,
for nighttime deliveries,
but also it means that, uh, those, the, the places
that those, uh, containers are being either taken to
or taken from need to be open at other hours
or there are other inefficiencies introduced
and that the transport operators loading the container
that vehicle's stuck parked up waiting to get into the port.
You know, and it might not be waiting at the port,
but it's just waiting somewhere else.
Again, I think this is why it's so important,
we get really good data to understand the full impacts
of trying to improve the supply chain. Tracy,
Um, I just had a quick clarification,
much better question later on.
Um, you've used the same, same, um, graphs
as the previous submitter.
Uh, I just wanna look at the average container exchange.
You say in writing that it's gone down over three years,
is it just not quite lined up therefore?
'cause it's not what this graph is showing to me.
Uh, I'm just conscious of going, we're at the beginning
of the inquiry period
and I just want us to be really clear about
what our assumptions are Yes.
Going forward. And I mean, it's, it's, it's kind
of a line call and I suspect it's just
not lining up properly.
I think there was a phasing issue,
but we, we are more than happy to come back
to the committee just to clarify that point.
Is there something more Behind that? Yes.
No, no, we're all certainly meant to doing that.
If we are setting off to look at answers.
I wanna know what the question really is. Yeah, absolutely.
Thank you. Just further clarification on that, Mr. Chair.
So I'm just looking at the graph now.
I think we can all see there was a peak prior to COVID.
And so, um, just confirming that
Tracy, you were, you were looking at most recently,
there's been a slight uptick,
but I think we could all agree that overall
It just says in in writing it says over the last
three years Yeah.
If we go back to quarter 1 22. Yeah.
Um, I don't wanna be making, I don't want
to be getting a ruler out to see seeing differences,
particularly with the trend line.
Is there. Great.
Um, so if we could just have a little bit more meat behind
that, that would be great.
Just we summarizing the benefit of the committee,
it looks like there was, um,
significant volumes being shifted prior to COVID
and then it drop dropped off the cliff, uh,
and then we haven't seen that recover.
Would that, would that be the way to summarize it?
C Correct. Okay. Thank you. So can
You just tell us what was driving, what, what was driving
that before COVID?
Sorry, Mr. Chair. I mean, I I think that
That No, no, the before COVID,
but in other words, the big, there was a big rise which we
then lost, but what was driving the rise in the first place
In, in, in terms of
how ports are managing the productivity?
That's really a question that the ports would be better off
answering than, than us. Sorry.
Yeah. Well this is the number of containers exchanged
by port by port, which suggests it's a, uh, reflective
of the total volume that's going through the ports.
Now the ports are managing it. Sure.
But somebody's actually putting that product
through the ports Oh,
Sorry. Into, yeah.
There was certainly been steady,
steady growth in the,
in the domestic freight task after they go,
Well that, that's, that was a significant leap
in this, in the freight task.
Where about what, what's the, oh, this is the, the one
that we've got there, which is the average container
exchange, which is, which essentially is proxy to,
that's the total volume that we're talking about, isn't it?
But if you look at the date, it doesn't,
mine might not line up properly, but mine's showing third
Quarter of 2020 As.
Yeah, well, whether it lines up
or not, I'm, I'm more interested in something is something
in the economy is driving a significant amount more product
is going through ports that
I'm reading. That makes sense,
doesn't
It? I'm reading that
Third quarter of 2020 as like our lockdowns over, but
Not all Closed, but the borders are closed,
so people are ordering way more online, spending
More money. You'd expect more
Imports. You'd expect a
slump first before you got that increase.
So I just wonder what's going on that's driving that,
because that's actually a long term
sustained increase before it then.
So we've heard falls off the cliff.
That might be something we might
have to come back to the Okay.
Yeah, but it'd be interesting because I mean, you, your,
your, um, members are carrying the product
so they, you must have some sort of data.
We, we are all talking about data,
but we don't actually know what, what it is
that's ultimately it's the amount of product
that somewhere is coming from some part of our economy if
that's gone up significantly at one point.
Yeah. What's that?
I think that's why in, in terms of what data we have,
and we, we find this is a common theme as we get MOT of the,
the climate commission, um, MBI coming
to US seat seeking data around
what our members are carrying versus we, yeah.
We're representing about a fifth of those sort of four
to 5,000 road freight companies.
They're incredibly competitive
and you know, the data they're able to share is so limited.
That's why I think there's real value in, in that freight
and demand study being completed.
And the shocking thing is that we are still referring
to even, even, you know, modal share
between road rail shipping.
We are looking at pre COVID data, um, in order to
properly understand, um, freight flows in,
in, in and out of regions.
And so yeah, that's why we've really emphasized, um,
the need to introduce that
and, um, yeah, in terms of what data we can provide, um,
we're a bit limited there in terms of, we, we can put in,
in, in inquiries with say, EERO
or Tally track Navman as those, um, ROC providers.
But I think about half
of heavy vehicle kilometers are going through those methods.
But understandably, those companies are very shy
to share information
because, um, road freighters
dope certainly don't want to do that.
But we, we can certainly look into that issue and come back.
This is, it's gonna be one of these challenges
that everybody's saying we want more data,
but if nobody wants to share the data,
it's, it's gonna be quite hard.
So that, that will be a, a challenge as to
how we actually achieve that.
But I'd be interested from your perspective of your members,
what the best way of managing to get better quality data.
And if we get better quality data from your members,
we get better quality across the board.
We start ending up with a
better picture than what we've got at the moment. I,
I think the ports clearly have the
best data on containers.
Sorry, the,
the ports clearly have the best data on containers. Mm-hmm.
I think if, if the, the, the advantage
of getting a formal piece of work done from MOT is,
it's a lot easier for us to go to some of our larger members
and for that to be shared if that's being run through
through the ministry mm-hmm.
Yeah. As opposed to sort of customer queries.
And, and the same with those, um, same
with those providers as well. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. I
Think I just wanted to clear, and it doesn't have
to be exhaustive, I'm having sort
of set you this horrible task,
but it's just that if we go right back to
that very first sentence,
we are making an assumption about productivity levels
and we are not basing it on anything
that we can probably all agree on.
So it really is just making sure
that anything we are saying, um, is, is grounded somewhere
so that we can, we can get at.
Yeah. I, I think, um, you know, there,
there are two graphs there.
So one's the port ship rate,
which is probably more productivity based.
Yeah. The second one, the average container exchange.
And in fact, if you see there's a dotted line there,
the linear, which is the linear line,
and that's more about container volume.
So, you know, one's container volume,
but one's productivity, the top one is the productivity one.
Right. And that clearly shows as, as council, uh, council
of Cargo owners was saying that, um, that, that
that drop since COVID
and then the non-return. Yeah, there should,
Yeah. And there's, and
there's certainly some caution
around some productivity measures.
I think by, by some measures,
Centerport down in Wellington is mm-hmm.
You know, very high in productivity.
However, that's partially
because they, they aren't just slammed with con, you know,
constant berths and other requirements.
So they can operate very efficiently when they have, um,
containers to load and unlock.
You're just gonna have to synthesize, get a, get away
through, um, what data we've got
and see what, what actually makes sense.
But I'll be, um, I haven't got any other questions
that anybody's got at the moment,
so I'm gonna gonna ask one other one.
Um, which is just your, your observations about the ability
of your operators to get from where they're coming from
to an inland port or a port.
Um, I'd be interested in just your observations about
where you see bottlenecks in the system, uh,
and where, particularly when we haven't had any conversation
about inland ports yet, what part those play or don't play.
Um, you know, whether they're optimally set up.
We've obviously got different people wanting
to build inland ports in different places.
Sometimes we might have multiple aspirations to build 'em,
you know, essentially inland are the same port.
And if we've been talking about, as we've heard earlier,
we don't wanna be overinvesting as a nation
and in infrastructure, um, just
'cause everybody wants a me too, um,
as in a me too situation.
So just be interested in your observation. So
Certainly Auckland Port, uh, I know there, there's a lot
of concern about getting
trucks through the Auckland traffic.
Right. And, and in fact, just like normal Auckland traffic,
they they suffer the same, the same issues.
Um, so much.
So, uh, Auckland Transport is looking at a, um, a project
that uses, um, prioritization of the traffic signals
to give, um, priority to, to not only buses,
they've done the travel with buses,
but they're going to do the same with, um,
vehicles going to the port.
I don't think Wellington's too bad,
but, um, certainly Christchurch, um, for anyone down
that way, bro Street, there's a big piece
of work going on there that's this main state highway,
um, over to the port.
Um, and so there's issues with that
and I, I think that's showing up in some changes
to the market with inland ports.
Uh, one of our larger members, uh, who's based in fin, um,
they've built the Fairfield Freight Hub.
So that essentially allows one empty container
boxes to be stored.
Uh, they can be railed from Port Littleton to Fairfield,
they can be stored there
and moved back to the port when required.
And that facility is also used to consolidate products, uh,
such as potatoes and then some, uh, grain.
And again, that, that's got good transport efficiencies,
but the fact that they've had to move
that port out there indicates they're close to the city.
You know, it's just too difficult.
So if the, I think if the committee in terms
of having sort of, uh, a action orientated, uh, uh,
recommendations or something there just to point out, yeah,
they're certainly competing bids
for those in inland port proposals.
And, um, we certainly get, um, contacted frequently by, um,
the, the, um, Q rail hub in Palmerston North, for example.
Um, basically look looking for support
and I guess it will be a decision of what, um, maybe,
maybe, yeah.
Selecting, selecting which, which, um,
facilities might be worth pursuing,
perhaps providing some direction about how
to prioritize different bids.
Because certainly they can make a very, I think all
of them can, can make a very compelling case.
I, I think a good example of that actually is Dunedin,
I'm not sure if you're aware there are two sort
of competing, competing, uh, proposals going on down there
and, and there's a good example
where perhaps some more leadership from
government would be very helpful.
Yeah. Okay.
Um, other questions or monopolize another one. Right.
Very useful. Yeah.
Well I think that that's, that's very, very helpful.
Um, see if there's any last questions.
Uh, I had, sorry, I did, I just sidetracked,
sorry. Um, about the link,
Just, uh, well, what you can concern, I, um, prior
to this role I was at, at uh,
Z in fact I joined when it was Shell
and I was the logistics manager.
So whilst I didn't get the product to the port terminals,
my job was to move it away from the terminal
minister where it needed to be.
And we did the vast majority of that by road.
Um, but I recall like being at Littleton, um, during a ship,
a tanker discharge, and that, uh, tanker had
to be moved off the port during a, um,
a discharge so that a, a boat with palm kernel could come in
'cause it had higher priorities
and the demurrage fees
for the palm kernel boat were higher than the demurrage fees
of putting the tanker ship off the wharf.
Right. What's the word you're using? Oh, sorry.
De demurrage. So like, if a ship has to wait and port
because it can't get in Yeah.
For fuel. Yeah. That was typically $150,000 a day.
Yeah, yeah. 150,000 a day
And Palm Palm was even more presumably.
Yeah. That's why. And so our team, um,
and it's usually a team, at least three people, oh, this is,
uh, five,
six years ago at the most, six years ago at the most.
Right. Um, so our team has to stand down
and they d they didn't know that was gonna happen.
You know, we talk about the uncertainty
and volatility of ships.
You, you'd think they're fairly slow moving,
but they, they are often held up.
Now Edin again, it's title, um, yeah.
And there's lots of flow on effects
and all those inefficiencies are big cost.
So, so today if we have a, a large container vessel
or tanker, whatever mm-hmm.
Um, or a bulk carrier, whatever, it doesn't matter, um,
being held up for a day, uh,
your thoughts about what that will cost?
'cause it's the cost of the shipping line,
which presumably they try
and recover somewhere from the customers,
but there's also the, the cost
to the land-based side of things as well. And,
Uh, on, on the land based side on, I'm sorry,
I'm just saying this on the run because the,
because the port's still active, you know, that that, that,
in that case I was discussed, you know,
the tanker ship moved off
because the palm kernel boat came in.
So the port's still gotta unload there.
So there's still activity at the port. Right.
But as I say, the cost for the tank ship to be, uh,
in DeMar was 150 KA day. And that
Was six years ago. That was six years ago.
Uh, yes, yes. Um, I just have a quick question about,
sorry, new subject, but that is, um, interesting
and I love that word emerge.
Um, the investment that the road transport has made,
because we heard, um, about,
I mean the logistical nightmare kind of blows my mind
and so far as trucks carrying load
and then obviously wanting to come back,
also carrying some load.
Mm-hmm. Is there any overarching sort of system
or logistics packages that are used
to better coordinate that
and how does that kind of look?
Um, if we were to transpose that on other parts
of the supply chain
Easement? So, uh,
look, the, there are, uh,
that's an emerging area,
and I'll give a good example actually in, in fact, um,
from New Zealand Council and cargo owners,
the chair who's from sco,
he could have given a much better story of this,
but in essence there's a, uh, some of the major
meat processing companies are engaging a third
party logistic provider.
It's called M two X or Market two X.
And if you think, uh, perhaps 10 years ago typ, typically
what would happen when, uh, animals go
to the processing plant,
the local transport operator would have
a relationship with the farmer.
They would, um, work out when those animals need to go.
That's almost been completely turned upside down now where,
uh, the processing plants know very much what their, um,
supply capability is.
And bear in mind, and I say this respectfully, a lot
of processing plants, um, it's hard to know
how much workforce capacity they'll have on any given day.
So they'll, you know, on it's today they will worked out,
okay, we can put this many down a kill chain.
So they will then
through their third party provider say,
we need this many animals.
Right? That third, that three PL goes
and looks at, um, these are the animals, these are
where all the truck fleets are, we will make sure
that every truck is fully loaded.
So it can make that route from there, you know, from
that area into the processing plant.
So that's one really good example of it.
There's also, um, there's,
there's back loading softwares as well mm-hmm.
That freight freighters can register with.
Basically customers put, um, ad advertise, um, you know,
they, they're doing a one way trip
and don't have cargo on the way back.
This kind of back loading, I'd say
that in increasingly there's, you know, there, there's
so much pressure on, on efficiency
and if you're, you know, carrying empty loads at the moment,
um, empty carting, that's a disaster at the moment.
So there's already pretty big incentives
for freight companies to be trying to manage
that as much as they can.
But yeah, the software solutions and I mean VVBS
and vehicle booking fees, that's, that's a software solution
rather than anything particularly the ports have, have done.
I think it's an international
provider, right. With that service.
Yeah. So, so is there anything that
we could usefully do, uh, with that?
Or is that just something the market will sort out in terms
of, of maximizing the back loading?
Yeah, I, I think the market will sort that out. Okay.
Um, just one, and, and again,
I I should have said at the start there, um,
please we're not endorsing any
of these individual companies,
although many, they, they will be our members,
but I'm, I'm just using their names as a example.
Net Logics is another, if you ever wanna look up,
net Logics has a whole lot of large, uh, companies such
as Fletcher's, um, and others.
And again, it looks at, uh, transport as just a resource.
Then it looks at all the customer demand
and then it sets out to work out how best
that available resource can be used for the demand.
On any given day. If,
If the committee I'd like to, to talk to any
of those individuals
or companies who would be very happy to,
um, to reach out to.
Thank you. Yeah, no, thank you. Appreciate that. Okay.
I think we are probably, probably good.
Really appreciate that.
Thank you Don. Thanks much. No problem.
Appreciate, Thank you both. Appreciate it. Appreciate
Your, we'll keep in touch. We
go through this. Yeah. Thank you.